You are listening to radiolab radio from W. N y.
S. T. E. N. P. R.
Okay. Let us begin. Hello. Hello. With it. An unusual encounter,
which comes from this lady Susan Schaller.
And where do you want me to start? Her story starts off actually,
it starts kind of abruptly. I was, uh, indeed riding a bicycle to high school
and a catering truck hit me
and I was put in the hospital with a concussion.
I was 17 years old and the concussion was bad enough that, um,
it slowed my brain enough that I couldn't read.
And so naturally I couldn't go to school, which sucked for her at 17.
I was very much a nerd and I was bored out of my mind.
So Imagine Susan sitting there in the hospital one day, one of your friends,
a friend of mine who is just a little older and had graduated the semester
before me, suggested going to the nearby university and, uh,
crashing classes. Why would you go if your brain was working slowly?
Why wouldn't you go swimming? I couldn't read,
but I could listen and I could hear and I, and the person was saying that, oh,
it's a lot better than high school.
And so one day she was at this college just kind of wandering down a random hole
and I opened the first door on the left.
That was the accident that changed my whole life,
just picking that door at the front of the room. It was this older guy,
he was still, he was bald and he was tracing sheeps in the air with his hands.
It was as if there were pictures being painted in the air and then they
immediately disappeared. Then another picture appeared.
Uh,
I was mesmerized.
Wow.
The professor was signing this class was actually one of the first classes to
teach sign at a regular hearing university. I had,
I had also walked into history but didn't know what fast forward five years,
Susan now is fluent in sign. She moves to Los Angeles.
It's the late 1970s and I was snatched and put into interpreter training
programs because at that time there were very,
very few interpreters and I found myself in a classroom in a community college
and something called a reading skills class. So she walks into the class,
she's kids all over the classroom making big excited gestures.
One to the other end out the door.
I saw this man holding himself kind of off by himself making his own straight
jacket. She went over to the instructor and she pointed at the guy who, who,
who's that guy over there at me instructors as well. Um,
he was born deaf. His uncle, he has this kind of insistent uncle who,
who brings him here every day.
We don't know exactly what to do with them though.
And what did this guy look like? He was a beautiful, um,
well, now I know, I don't know if I would had that in my head at the time,
but a beautiful looking Mayan, you know, high cheekbones and black hair,
black eyes and something about his eyes caught heritage.
He was studying mouth and I, I walked up to him and said, hello,
my name is Susan and this is where things start to get a little weird.
He looks at her and instead of signing his name, whatever it was,
he brings up his hands and signs right back to her. Hello, my name is Susan.
Susan like Shakespeare. There's no I am Susan. And he responds, no, no,
I am Susan. Everything you said he tried to say exactly.
I call it visual Echolalia
and I remember thinking, why is he doing this? I mean,
Susan, did he, did he look like he had some kind of disability or um,
he was intelligent.
I wouldn't have been able to answer if you had asked me how can you see
intelligence, but you can actually see intelligence and people's eyes.
He was just missing something to copy me meant that he didn't really know what I
was doing and that's when it occurred to me. This man does not blind
at, wait, how old was this guy? He was 27 years old. I mean in all that time,
no one had taught him sign language or anything. Well,
it didn't know he was deaf. He was born deaf.
He didn't know there was sound really 27 years, no idea that there was sound.
You could see the mouse moving, could see people responding.
He thought we figured all this stuff out visually and he thought,
I must be stupid. So here's the question for our hour.
This is Radiolab. I'm Jad Abumrad. I'm Robert Krulwich words.
What do words do for us? Are they necessary? Can you live without?
Can you think without them? Can you dream without them?
Can you, can you swim back to the story?
So this man that Susan, that we don't actually know his real name,
but when she wrote about him in her book, a man without words,
she called him Ildefonso. They are sitting in the classroom,
she's right there with him.
And of course she's wondering what have you been doing for 27 years?
So she thinks, well,
let me see if I can teach him some just basic sign language in interest in case
she takes out a book. And makes the sign book, but the sign for book,
it looks like opening up a book.
So he thought I was ordering him to open a book and so he grabbed the book in
the opens because they thought I was asking him to do something.
It was very difficult if I gave him the sign for standing up,
he thought I wanted him to stand up and so I couldn't,
I couldn't have a conversation with them then.
It was the most frustrating thing I've ever done in my life. Wait a second.
How long did this go on for? Well, uh, weeks.
There was weeks oftentimes when we said goodbye or just laughed me couldn't
really say goodbye. I really believe that we wouldn't see each other again.
And I was oftentimes very surprised when he would be sitting there at the table.
And I think sometimes he looks surprised that I showed up,
but after a couple of weeks of him constantly miming copying me,
she had an idea perhaps. So it's just possible that if I,
if I died tomorrow, I would have had only one really,
really good thought in my life. And this was it.
I thought I'm going to ignore him.
[inaudible]
I taught an invisible student.
I stopped talking to him and I stopped having eye contact and I set up an empty
chair. And then she said she would hold up to this empty chair,
a picture of a cat.
And I was trying to explain to this invisible student that this creature,
a cat. So I'd be miming a cat and petting a cat,
and then I sign the sign for cat. Then she would hop to the other seat,
the invisible student's seat and pretend to get it. Oh, I know.
It's my facial expression. Oh, I get it. So you're playing all the parts.
You're both the teacher and the invisible student. That's right.
That's doing all these crazy things. And he just watched me.
He stopped copying her, which was good.
But I do this over and over and over for days and days and days.
And she says he just didn't get it. He was, he looked bored a lot of times.
But one day in the middle of one of these endless pretend student exercises,
something happened. How did the corner of her eye,
she sees him, his body, and they looked.
It's interesting how his body was upright and he looked like something was about
to happen.
He looked around the room,
this is a 27 year old man and looks around the room as if he had just landed
from Mars. And it was the first time he ever saw anything. Something was about
his eyes grew wider and wider and then he slaps his hands on the table.
Oh, everything has a name. [inaudible]
[inaudible]
and then looks at me in this demanding way and I signed table and he points to
the door and I signed door and he points to the clock and he points to me and I
find Susan
and then he started crying.
He just collapsed and he started crying.
[inaudible]
what is it that happens in human beings?
When we get symbols and we start trading symbols, it changes our thinking.
It changes our ideas of Oh, is no longer the thing,
a table that we eat on,
but there's something about the symbol enable that makes the table look
different.
Ildefonso was in love. He was in love.
It's like everything has a name.
And for the first couple of weeks he had this,
this list of names that kept growing and growing paper,
Eagle clock, green eye.
[inaudible] kept copying words for him and
gave him the sign for door, door door, right? D O r
start praying to see that. Can each try berry bolted this paper?
Yeah. J was treasure. Treasure.
And you would pull it out every day and you would lie in carefully unfolded
tiger and you would add to it, to SAP up there, Jay thanking
me idea, add to it. Land, walk down,
add to it cows.
The Blue Wall. Sorry.
What is it that happens in human beings when we get symbols, symbols. You know,
once you have begun to put words onto things,
you can look at a thing,
say this symbolic sound table and the person opposite you knows that you're
talking about.
But she seems to be saying something deeper though that like when you get the
word for table, uh, suddenly the table,
like this table right here looks different. Like,
it's somehow the word changes the world in some fundamental way. Now,
I don't know if that's true about the table thing,
but consider what happens when you put words together. Okay.
When you link them up.
Good. Okay.
So I want to tell you about this experiment and fantastic that I learned about
from a, a fellow I talked to sometimes Charles and Charles Phony,
who I'm a psychologist at Durham University in the UK for any Ho and note,
when I first read about this experiment in Charles's book,
cooled a thousand days of wonder.
It blew my mind out of my nose and onto the book. It's a little messy.
I never wanting to be with you in the library.
Takes a little journey to get to the mind blowing part. But, um, luckily,
and I'll let Charles explain it. The whole thing happens in a room. Yeah.
You're put into this room which is colored completely white.
The walls are white, saving's white, the floors. So it's all way all wind,
everything's fine. And you can tell where you are at today's standards.
Some of the walls are longer than others. So when you're we in a rectangle,
that's what you were just going. Yeah. So rectangular room.
Are you with me so far? I'm with you so far. Okay.
Just to give you a sense of the baseline conditions here.
Imagine you were a rat in this room. Okay.
And somebody comes along and heights an object in one corner of the room. What?
It can be anything. I mean for rats we do use food like a biscuit or something.
Yeah, they hide a biscuit and one of the four corners in one corner you see it.
Okay. But before you can get to it, they pick you up by your tail,
spin you around a bunch of times. Let me, so you don't know where you are,
you don't know which direction you're facing it.
And then they say right now go find the biscuit. So if you do this with rat,
what will happen is it'll say, all right, let me go find the biscuit.
And it will go to one corner, which looks right,
right?
But of course the room also looks like that.
If you turn around through 190 degrees and face exactly the opposite direction
because it's a rectangle.
So they get it right about 50% of the time because corners or rectangles or two
of them are identical. Yeah.
[inaudible]
all right. So uh,
[inaudible] should we get on with this because I'm well aware of rectangles.
I've just, I just needed to get that out of the way.
Cause the cool part is coming up.
So what the experimenters did next is they took one of the four white walls
and they turned it blue.
So imagine this scenario, you're in this room.
Let's get these four white walls or rather three white walls.
One of them is blue, right? Yeah. Well now you're not confused anymore. You can,
you can relate everything to the blue wall. You can be like, oh,
the corner with the biscuit was left of the blue wall or right of the Blue Wall.
I get to the left. You now have the blue wall as a navigational clue. Yes.
That makes sense. You know, we would all be able to do that.
That's not going to be difficult for us. All right,
we got to the good fight yet that's it's coming. It's coming.
Turns out though the rats, he says, Nice.
They're still scoring 50 50 what?
It's as if they can't take any notice of the Blue Wall. Even with the Blue Wall,
they're only finding the biscuit 50% of the time. Wait a second. Can see color.
Yeah. Rats can do color. They do call it pretty well. Okay. They also do left,
right? Just fine,
but what they can't do is connect those two bits of information together.
In other words, they can only, well, they can do left that they can do.
They can do blue get blue, but it's, they're both separate.
They can't do left of blue.
These different kinds of knowledge can't talk to each other. Oh,
does anyone know that? I mean who? Who would?
Rats have been interviewed for this survey. What? David?
They infer this based on studying the rats so the rat doesn't have what doesn't
have the neurons, doesn't have the what doesn't?
He doesn't have the rat can't do it. That's just, that's all you need to know.
And I'm gonna make it weird and right now, neither can some humans.
I spent the first 10 or 15 years of my scientific life studying creatures who
don't, don't
talk yet.
That's Elizabeth spell cause she's a psychologist at Harvard.
Quite famous for her work with um, hi. You can hear babies.
And I was interested in uh,
their abilities in relation to billions of other animals get up.
We're going to go into the monkey room. So she began the baby development lab,
which is filled with toys and on any given day,
five or six really tiny kids,
six months I'm thinking. Yeah, toddlers too.
You three and a half big time.
So at a certain point, Elizabeth Spelke,
he decided to build a version of the white room in this lab because she wondered
if rats have so trouble connecting the idea of left to blue.
What about surely maybe humans,
a self-respecting 18 month old human child will succeed in putting them
together. But no,
what we find is that children behave just like the rats, just like the rat,
just like the rat. Just like the retro almost. Yeah, just like the rats.
Well, we don't test them with food. We don't test them with digging.
So in superficial ways, superficial features of the studies are different,
but she says kids like the rats cannot connect to the idea of left to the idea
of blue.
They just can't do it and they can't do it at one they can't do it at to,
I can't do it three, four, five.
And we find that those children start performing like adults around six years of
age. Now I'm interested. Good.
Something happens at the ripe old age of six or it is shockingly late, right?
Yeah. Well,
something happened at the age of six that suddenly allows the kid to connect
concepts like left to concepts like blue. And the question is what?
What happens?
Several people have suggested that one candidate for his processors doing this
is language
[inaudible]
you mean? It's the language. Kids are talking certainly at three four,
five and six they talk, I'm like, I'm like the too much, but they're not.
What they haven't yet started to use is spatial language and particularly the
kinds of spatial language that adults would use in this situation to describe
what they're doing. And somewhere around the age of six,
they start to use phrases like [inaudible] over the Blue Wall.
And those aren't just words that come out of the child's mouth.
Liz thinks that inside the child's brain,
what that phrase does is link these concepts together plink and at that moment,
Whoa,
the child leaves the rats behind
you show that is that she doesn't think that kids have that. What?
Let me put it to you a different way. Okay?
This is my best understanding of what she thinks.
Her basic idea is that a child's brain begins as a series of islands
and on one island way over here in the rain, you've got say color.
Can you call that the blue island blue. Blue, blue, blue, blue, blue, blue.
That's the part of you that perceives the color blue way.
On the other side of the brain.
You've got the part of you that perceived spatial stuff like left, left,
[inaudible] third objects like wall. Whoa, Whoa, Whoa, Whoa, whoa, Whoa, whoa.
These things are there from the beginning. But they're separate.
Then you get to where it's left Blue Wall and then the child for the first time
comes upon the phrase
left the blue.
And in that moment all the islands
come together. It is literally the phrase itself,
she says that creates that internal connection.
Everybody's always talked about how language is this incredible tool for
communication,
delays us to exchange information with other people so much more richly and
effectively other animals can.
But language also seems to me to serve as a mechanism of communication between
different systems within a single mind. There you go.
Wouldn't it be just as possible? Just listen to me here.
[inaudible] that the kid's brain is developing some new connections and what
follows then follows from the changes in the brain.
So the words are like an after, after, after, after fact after effect. Yeah.
Well that's a good, that's um, no, no,
and the experiment is actually accounted for that, like what the experiment is,
did next is that they saw, okay,
if language is adding this extra element, let's try and knock it out.
How would you do that?
Would you like shoot something into their brain that kills the language part or
something?
It's a much simpler way of doing it in a much more humane thing that you can do.
What we did is put adults in the room and then she says she gave him an iPod,
they've got headphones on playing through those headphones and someone talking.
Yup.
And their job while they're in the room is to just repeat what the person is
saying continuously listening to speech and repeating it the whole time they
were in this actually a really hard thing to do.
If you've ever tried shadowing somebody speaking, I mean if you try it,
can we try it? You go and I'll, and I'll shadow you. Okay.
Gel Chart and start speaking and start speaking, right?
Just say exactly that exact clear. Say, Oh my God, my head.
That's really hard actually. Solid. Yeah.
And what that does is it knocks out your capacity to use language for yourself.
Basically battering the words out of the adult's head. Why are they doing this?
Again, I only want to see like if you blast the words out of somebody's head,
what would happen? Can they find the biscuit?
Will they be able to form that simple thought left of the blue wall or will they
be like the rats who can't and and we actually got very dramatic results.
They went right back to be not the rats. Wow.
[inaudible]
Charles,
what I'm wondering is if language allows you to construct a thought that is so
basic as the biscuit is left of the blue wall,
what is thought without language? Well,
I didn't think it's very much at all.
What do you mean? I'm going to put it in a different way.
And this involves making quite a controversial statement.
I don't think very young children. Do you think
like think period? Was there a period at the end of that sentence?
I don't think they think in the way that I want to call thinking,
which is a bit of a cheat, but let me see what I mean by thinking. Okay.
If you reflect on your own experience,
if you think about what's going on inside your head as you're just walking to
work or sitting on a subway train,
much of what's going on in your head at that point is actually verbal.
I'm going to suggest that the central thread of all that is actually language.
It's a stream of inner speech.
That's what most of us think of as
well. On the other hand,
what I'm most aware of when I'm reflecting is this stuff that I can't put into
words. I think that he's exaggerating the role of of language here.
Yes. This all really hinges on how you would define thinking.
Yes, and Liz would say, take a musician,
like I'll give you my example of Bill Evans. Here is a form of thought
[inaudible]
that carries you through
definite sequence of phrases, feelings,
[inaudible],
emotions, changes,
[inaudible]
and there are no words,
but there's something that we get access to when we gain a full natural language
that we can use, not only to communicate with other people, but with ourselves.
Here we go to Shapiro's test, testing, test, test, test.
This language is fundamentally a competent tutorial system.
As we hit up the steps here, what is this?
This is that we're going to Columbia Lumpia University. See,
we'd gotten interested in the last thing that Liz Belky said about language
being a common rhetorical thing system, right? And that led us to Columbia.
Here's the deal.
Seven minutes is you have words now you have words in combination now.
Now you can play with the combination and that one more as here.
Just us three then. Right? It's just a straight good opens up, huh?
A kind of an infinity head to foot. Now as he total gills,
hardly tripped with better fathers, mothers, daughters,
sons baked in and pasted with the parching streets,
the lended Tyrannus and damn the light to their viral murders.
This is Shakespeare.
When I sat in middle school and they gave a Shakespeare roasted and wrath and
fire and this or size it with coagulate goals,
I was completely confused and I felt stupid. I said,
can you just introduce yourself? This is James Shapiro, m. A.
He is a Shakespeare scholar,
obviously at Columbia University where I've taught for 25 years and one reason
he says that Shakespeare can be confusing is that often Shakespeare behave not
so much like a writer,
but more like a like a chemist combining elements.
He's taking words and he's shoving them together, smashing them together,
if you will, and combining sometimes these word experiments.
They didn't go so well. Yes,
the princes or Gellis oculus has no,
that goes to me. What does it mean you got me? I mean, I should know.
I told him, but look what he did just by adding a little prefix on.
There's so many words that we're now familiar with, unnerved it, you know,
we all know what that means, but nobody had heard, unnerved it, unaware,
uncomfortable. He made up uncomfortable.
He was the first to use that word on a stage, right?
An earthly unhand undress,
an educated ungoverned,
mid Galeana published something that's near and dear to me, public, unsolicited,
unswayed unclog on a piece of unchanging unreal.
He made up unreal. He's the first to use it in print or on stage.
What an audience that time ever understood what the unprefixed meant.
I think it takes you a split second, um,
to kind of put that on on the reel,
but then suddenly you got this new concept that there's something real but Nah,
he's taking words that ordinarily are not stuck together.
Things like mad cat, lady bird shoving them together,
eye drops to achieve a kind of atomic power.
I saw eyeball. He did eyeball. Yes.
It's hard to understand how someone could think of that,
but it seems like it's always been there.
If you asked me what his greatest gift is,
he's putting them together into phrases that have stuck in our heads,
so truth will out, truth will out. What's done is done.
I could go on and on. [inaudible] crack of doom.
My favorite dead as a doornail, a dish fit for the gods.
Dog will have his day. Fainthearted fool's paradise forever and a day for gone.
Conclusion, the game is a full game is up Greek to me in a pickle,
in my heart of hearts, in my mind's eye, kill with kindness.
Believe it or not, knock, knock. Who's [inaudible] there?
[inaudible] stuff into stitches. Love is blind. What the Dickens falls. Well,
that ends well. Sure.
Something wicked this way comes
and a sorry sight. Wow,
that's a chip. That's fantastic.
How did he create phrases that stick in the mind that make it seem as if they
always existed? Yeah. You're taking out a book.
Thinking of a passage here that is maybe the biggest book I've ever seen.
Nonsense. It was at least 3000 patients. Shakespeare,
those write a lot about process.
But there are one or two places where he does in a poem called Lucrece in which
a woman is a rate Lucrece is rape and she has to write a letter to her husband
explaining what happened to her and she's struggling to um,
to find the words in which to do this.
And finally she picks up the pen and it goes,
she prepares to write first hovering all the paper with a quill conceit and
grief and eager combat fight. What,
which sets down his bladder straight with will this two curious good.
This plantain l much like oppressive people at Adore. It's wrong.
Her inventions, which shall go before, are we that couplet again,
much like the press of people at a door for wrong, her inventions,
which shall go before,
if you want to extrapolate from this something that Shakespeare might have
himself experienced, you have a situation with all these ideas oppressing.
It's like a throng of them. Who's getting through that
doorway first?
It's a little bit maybe like that experience you might have at a nightmare New
York club where you've got like thousands of people in us,
tiny space and everyone's trying to push their way out. And I'm like, Jack,
let me do the door. Get out on my way. And it's just like this
of images of sound concedes thoughts, ideas,
and they are providing the pressure that's needed to produce
[inaudible].
You know what, just makes sense to me, this interpretation now,
not just for Shakespeare, maybe for anybody,
certainly the guy we met at the beginning. Ildefonso who,
who just learned where it's for the first time. Yeah. I mean,
as you move through the world, if you're sensitive at all and you're observant,
you're going to get filled up with all of these things which you have to express
but can't until you get those words. Then
the door opens.
[inaudible]
and thanks to James Shapiro,
Professor at Columbia University whose newest book is contested, will,
hmm wrote Shakespeare also, thanks to our kids,
Louisa CRAs now still a story and Isaiah Harrison,
and also thanks to the moms that brought them in. Teres Tripoli.
Carrie Donahue and Patricia steric.